In this paper, I will discuss the argument for the Problem of Evil, a thinkable theodicy in contradiction of the argument, and then answer to the theodicy. The Problem of Evil is an disagreement that express that God can’t be whichever all-knowing, all- powerful, as well as/or else all good. ” At the core of every difficult is the conviction that the being of God plus the presence evil are mismatched. They provide “whichever/or” problem: either evil exists God or exists, for they can’t exist both. Obviously evil do exist; consequently, God must exist (Allen, 1990). Therefore, in order to explain this argument I will use a technique, which is defined as a dialogue between two people with different views about Gods’ existence, and so on. I will call the first person subject 1 and the other subject 2.
Subject 1: It seems to me that the evil’s existence in the creation contradicts the being of God at least the God you believe in: individual who is omnibenevolent and omnipotent, omniscient, (Pike, 1990). Therefore if God existed as omnipotent, God would be capable of preventing suffering; if God existed as omniscient, God would identify how to stop suffering; and if God existed as omnibenevolent, God would want to stop suffering.  Nonetheless the suffering still exists.  This is obvious.  Then subsequently suffering exists, it appears to follow that God does exist (Wykstra, 1990).
Subject 2: I disagree.  I think the existence of suffering is compatible with the existence of an omnipotent, omniscient, and omnibenevolent God (“The Problem of Evil”).Subject 1: Go ahead and prove your case; I’m listening. A theodicy is an effort to defend or justify God presence in the face of evil. According to Pike, (1990) suggests that if God survives, He is omniscient, omnibenevolent, and omnipotent; in short, God would have the knowledge, desire, and ability to stop evil. With the clear presence of evil, God must not then exist (Chisolm, 1990). 
Subject 2:  Well, first of all, I think we need to distinguish between the two different types of suffering.  First, there is the suffering caused by humans; such actions as murder, rape, and child abuse fall under this category (Inwagen, 1999).   Second, there is the suffering caused by natural forces; natural disasters, diseases, and the harm caused by dangerous animals fall under this category.  In what follows, I’d first like to deal with the suffering caused by humans. 
Subject 1:  So you will begin with moral evil and then move your way to natural evil.
Subject 2:  Correct. 
Subject 1:  We can explain why God allows much of the world’s moral evil to exist by appealing to what is often referred to as the Free Will Defense.  According to the Free Will Defense, the best type of universe is one in which free agents exist; moreover, a universe containing such agents and a certain amount of evil (at least as much evil as our present world contains) is better than one containing no free agents and no evil.  Given these facts, God—who knows all, who can do all, and who desires the best—created the world as we know it:  a world in which free agents exist (Gutiérrez, 1987).  
Subject 2:  Wait a minute; wait just a minute.  You have a lot to explain.  First, you say that the best type of universe is one that contains free agents.  But why?  Why should I believe this is so? Subject 1:  Well, I definitely believe it.  I believe that there is nothing greater in life than loving God and loving other people and, in return, being loved by God and being loved by other people.  Life without love would be miserable; it would not be a life worth living (Allender and Tremper 1999).   In fact, I’d say that love is so great, so wonderful, that a life containing both love and a certain amount of suffering is far superior to a life containing no suffering but also no love. 
Subject 2:  Okay, fine, but what’s your point? 
Subject 1:  My point is that one cannot love if he is not free.  One cannot be programmed to love; a robot cannot love.  Love is a choice.  Therefore, given that (1) the best type of life is a life in which one loves others and (2) one can only love if he is free, it follows that (3) the best type of life is one in which one is free. 
Subject 2:  Okay, I concede that point.  In fact, I never really disagreed with it.  I just wanted to see how you’d respond to some criticism.  Well, job well done; I applaud you; you’ve proven your point.  I concede that (1) the best type of universe is one in which free agents exist, and (2) a universe containing such agents and a certain amount of evil (at least as much evil as our present world contains) is better than one containing no free creates and no evil.  However, you have a long way to go before proving the existence of wickedness in the biosphere ensures not contradict the presence of God (Chisolm, 1990). 
One of the theodicy is The Soul Making Theodicy evil in the practice of suffering is indispensable to offer humans with a biosphere where spiritual and moral progress is conceivable. Personal progression soul making can take place simply when individuals make free choices in reaction to the pain as well as suffering of living (Rowe, 1985).  Objections to the Soul-Making Theodicy: Suffering can change personality and build it; God’s permitting persons to suffer for individual good constitutes ethically offensive paternalism. (3) Far more evil afﬂicts people than is required for soul-making. God may perhaps occur at the last instant every while evil is almost to occur.  However, when anything bad is almost to occur or a sin was almost to be committed, God may perhaps come in and put end it (Geivett, 1993). The protector of the Problem of Evil disagreement can answer to theodicy by stating that to realize this image of God; individuals require be developing and refining. The theodicy suggests that suffering and evil exists in the creation for this is the finest way for individuals to grow. 
